Understanding Fire Principles

To build a fire, it’s crucial to understand the basic principles. Fuel, in a non-gaseous state, doesn’t burn directly. When heat is applied to fuel, it produces a gas which, combined with oxygen in the air, burns.

The Fire Triangle

The concept of the fire triangle is vital in correctly constructing and maintaining a fire. The triangle’s three sides represent air, heat, and fuel. Removing any of these extinguishes the fire. The correct ratio of these components is crucial for a fire to burn at its greatest capability, and can only be learned through practice.

Choosing a Site

Before building a fire, consider the area (terrain and climate) in which you’re operating, the materials and tools available, the time you have, why you need a fire, and how close the enemy is. Look for a dry spot that is protected from the wind, suitably placed in relation to your shelter (if any), will concentrate the heat in the direction you desire, and has a supply of wood or other fuel available.

Preparing the Site

In a wooded or brush-covered area, clear the brush and scrape the surface soil from the spot you’ve selected. Clear a circle at least 1 meter in diameter to minimize the chance of the fire spreading. If time allows, construct a fire wall using logs or rocks. This wall will help direct the heat where you want it, reduce flying sparks, and cut down on the amount of wind blowing into the fire. However, you’ll need enough wind to keep the fire burning. Be cautious not to use wet or porous rocks as they may explode when heated.

Underground Fireplace

In some situations, an underground fireplace or Dakota fire hole may best meet your needs. It conceals the fire and is good for cooking food. To make one, dig a hole in the ground and on the upwind side of this hole, poke or dig a large connecting hole for ventilation. Build your fire in the hole.

Snow-Covered Area

If you’re in a snow-covered area, use green logs to make a dry base for your fire. Trees with wrist-sized trunks are easily broken in extreme cold. Cut or break several green logs and lay them side by side on top of the snow. Add one or two more layers, laying the top layer of logs opposite those below it.

Materials Needed

You need three types of materials to build a fire–tinder, kindling, and fuel. Tinder is dry material that ignites with little heat–a spark starts a fire. Kindling is readily combustible material that you add to the burning tinder. Fuel is less combustible material that burns slowly and steadily once ignited.

Fire Structures

There are several ways to structure a fire. The tepee structure involves arranging the tinder and a few sticks of kindling in the shape of a tepee or cone. The lean-to structure involves pushing a green stick into the ground at a 30-degree angle and leaning pieces of kindling against the stick. The cross-ditch method involves scratching a cross about 30 centimeters in size in the ground, digging the cross 7.5 centimeters deep, and building a kindling pyramid above the tinder. The pyramid structure involves placing two small logs or branches parallel on the ground and adding three or four more layers of logs or branches, each layer smaller than and at a right angle to the layer below it.

Igniters

Igniters provide the initial heat required to start the tinder burning. They fall into two categories: modern methods and primitive methods. Modern methods include matches, convex lens, metal match, battery, and gunpowder. Primitive methods include flint and steel, fire-plow, and bow and drill.

Note: Primitive fire-building methods are exhaustive and require practice to ensure success.
